docs: Add retirement docs (#1488)
openedx/docs.openedx.org: source/site_ops/concepts/user_retirement.rst

.. _User Retirement Concept:

What is User Retirement?
########################

.. tags:: site operator, concept

**User retirement** is the Open edX toolset for handling requests to delete a
user account and to remove or obfuscate that user's Personally Identifiable
Information (PII) from the platform. A learner can request that their account
be deleted, and site operators can then run a process that erases or scrambles
that learner's PII across the services that make up a particular Open edX site
(the LMS, forums, credentials, and others).

.. important::

>    User retirement is **not** a compliance guarantee. It makes no claim of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   User retirement is **not** a compliance guarantee. The Open edX software makes no claim of
```

I think this might be more explicit

built as a *configurable pipeline* of small steps, each of which retires some
of the user's data in one system. Operators can add, remove, or reorder
steps to match the services their site actually uses.

The main pieces
***************

User retirement is made up of a few moving parts that work together.

The account deletion UI
=======================

The learner-facing entry point is a **Delete My Account** section on the
learner's Account page. When a learner confirms deletion (by entering their
password), three things happen immediately:

* All of the learner's browser sessions are logged out and the account is
  disabled, so the learner can no longer sign in.
* A row is created in the LMS database (the ``UserRetirementStatus`` record)
  that marks the account as awaiting retirement.
* A confirmation email is sent to the learner.

At this point the account is **deactivated but not yet retired** — no PII has
been erased. Whether this UI is shown is controlled by the
``ENABLE_ACCOUNT_DELETION`` feature setting in the LMS.

The cool-off period
===================

After a deletion request, the account sits in a waiting state (called

> ``PENDING``) for a configurable number of *cool-off days*. During this window a

Reviewer: How are cool-off days configured?

Author: I'm not sure that belongs in this doc, but it is covered in the new how-to I just added. I can link it here if you think that makes sense.

Reviewer: I think it'd be good to reference the how-to here, yes

learner who changed their mind can contact the site's support or operator and
have the request cancelled, restoring the account. Only once an account has
been in the ``PENDING`` state longer than the cool-off period is it considered
ready for actual retirement. This gives operators a safety margin against
accidental or regretted deletions.

The retirement process
======================

> The retirement process is the batch job that actually carries out deletions.

Reviewer: I assume the retirement process is not enabled by default?

Author: The process itself isn't, but the UI to delete your account is

Reviewer: Makes sense, maybe this could be clarified with something like

```suggestion
The retirement process is a manually-configured batch job that actually carries out deletions.
```

Author: It's somewhat confusing in that if you install the Tutor plugin *and* are on k8s it will actually create a cron for it and start running the pipeline. In all other cases you need to do something manual to kick the job. For this doc I was just trying to outline the concept of the process so didn't want to have to get into the weeds of various ways things might be configured.

If a users's ``UserRetirementStatus`` row is set to ``PENDING`` or any
``_COMPLETE`` state (ex: ``ENROLLMENTS_COMPLETE``), the pipeline will pick
up from the *following* step on the next pipeine run.

.. important::

   Setting a user's state to any **working** state (ex: ``RETIRING_ENROLLMENTS``)
   will cause the user to be seen as "in progress" by the pipeline and ignored.
   They will be stuck in a partially retired state until manually moved. It
   is important to occasionally check that no users have been left in a working
   state for too long.

The retirement APIs
===================

Each step in the pipeline calls an API in one of the platform's services. Most
of these live in the LMS and do the real work of forgetting a user such as
unenrolling them from courses, scrubbing their forum posts, and scrambling their
username and email so that neither can be reused. The retirement pipeline
configuration maps each step to the specific service and API method it should
call, which is how operators extend the process to cover additional services or
custom data.

Deploying user retirement with Tutor
************************************

> Setting up user retirement by hand involves several steps: creating a dedicated

Reviewer: what do you mean "by hand" here?

Author: Manually, vs using the Tutor plugin. I can clarify

Reviewer: The section title here is "Deploying user retirement with Tutor", should it just be "without Tutor" then?

Author: I've removed "by hand" since it remains true that the process needs those steps whether the Tutor plugin does them or an operator configures it some other way. Does it read more clearly now?

plugin automates most of this. It registers the OAuth2 credentials for the
retirement service worker, populates the pipeline states in the LMS, and
provides a command (and, on Kubernetes, a scheduled job) to run the retirement
process on a regular cadence with a configurable cool-off period. While not an
official part of an Open edX release, it is well maintained.

.. seealso::

   `Enabling the User Retirement Feature <https://docs.openedx.org/projects/edx-platform/en/latest/references/docs/scripts/user_retirement/docs/index.html>`_
      In-depth reference documentation on configuring the services, setting up
      the driver scripts, and extending the retirement pipeline.

   `tutor-contrib-retirement <https://github.com/cleura/tutor-contrib-retirement>`_
      Community-maintained Tutor plugin for deploying user retirement.

**Maintenance chart**

+--------------+-------------------------------+----------------+--------------------------------+
| Review Date  | Working Group Reviewer        |   Release      |Test situation                  |
+--------------+-------------------------------+----------------+--------------------------------+

> |              |                               |                |                                |

Reviewer: I would fill this out as accurate - is it accurate for Verawood, or only currently on main (eg Willow)?

Author: This should be up to date going back several releases. The process itself hasn't changed in years, but the Tutor plugin only goes back a few releases AFAIK.

Author: Would you be the working group reviewer here?

Reviewer: Gotcha. Usually I put the person with expertise here - so you - or you could put "Data WG" if you don't want your own name in the docs.
